# Stats and Equipment

Characters don't have a "level" - they're defined entirely by their Class and
their gear. Mostly, equipment provides stats, from a wide selection:

* Defensive:
  - Physical Mitigation (armor)
  - Magical Mitigation (resistance)
  - Fortitude (Max Health, disease/poison resistance and mitigation)
  - Dodge (Physical and Magical avoidance)
  - Protection (critical and area damage reduction, mitigation of "snares")
  - Spirit (health/magic recovery, max MP)
* Offensive:
  - Strength (melee attack damage, armor penetration)
  - Agility (ranged/finesse attack damage, attack haste)
  - Accuracy (hit/crit chance)
  - Intellect (Spell damage and healing)
* And there are several "ratings" available as well, that represent some substat
  in isolation - "critical strike rating", "armor penetration rating", "haste
  rating". These are all less efficient in terms of item-score than the raw
  stats, so they show up less frequently.

And then any item can have "proc" abilities - effects that happen intermittently,
as a result of actions, attacks, taking damage, etc. They are generally described
in terms of "occurrences per minute", though it is possible to build items that
do flat things every time (like "heal 10% whenever you kill an enemy with more HP
than you").

The item-score of a purely stat-bearing item can be calculated like a 'budget' -
it costs more item-score to put 20 agility on an item than 10 agility and 10
strength; it costs less to put 20 hit rating on than 20 accuracy. But ultimately
the item-score is specified by the item's creator; totally reasonable to call
an item giving 20 Strength and 20 Spirit "worse" than one giving 20 Strength and
20 Accuracy, since those stats aren't generally relevant to the same abilities.

More importantly, the impact of a "proc" is not generally calculatable - some,
like "about once per minute, gain 200 agility for 6 seconds" could reasonably
be estimated, but who knows the stat equivalence of "once per minute on taking
physical damage while below 40% HP, gain a 5%? HP shield"?

In the end, you should use items generated by someone who you (usually via the
community) trust to score their items well.

## Other Units

Non-player units do not wear equipment. Instead their stats are described
directly, using the same attributes. Builders _can_ specify those attributes
directly, but will more typically just grab one of the default unit builds
(like "heavy, slow, weak to magic"), scale it to the right difficulty (which
the tool will do for them - "upgraded four times"), drop in abilities for
them to use ("claw, bite, acid-spit") with which to _apply_ those stats, and
tweak the result afterward if it doesn't quite match their intent.

One wouldn't normally create new monsters for every unit in a dungeon - you'd
pick some themed collections of monsters (from core or another Builder that
did a bunch of monster designs), and just drop several of the right sorts into
place.

